# Introduction

This is not a practical business book. At least not by what most people deem "practical." I thought about writing one but soon realized that it would not help you in the slightest. If I were to tell you exactly what to do, some people would do it, fewer would get results, and even fewer would be able to pivot when my map does not directly match up with your territory. You do not have my mind. You do not have my experience. You do not have my thousands of tiny failures that subtly influence my decision-making. That is not arrogance but beauty, because neither do I have your mind, experience, or the failures that make your journey unique enough to succeed.

My goal is not to give you actionable steps. My goal is to inject better ideas into your mind that frame how you think about the actions you take. Belief comes before action, and if you don't have a mind composed of beliefs that nearly guarantee success, you will struggle. But these beliefs can't be dogmatic. Instead, we need to go meta. I want to provide you with a frame from which you can create your own actionable steps, and when those fail, you will have a mind built to persist and iterate until they don't.

I do not plan to glorify money. Society has already done enough of that. But here's the thing: The answer isn't to reject money. Money is the lifeblood of society as we know it, and unless you want to hide off in the woods because your perception of money got the better of you, the only option is to merge purpose and profit. If you were fooled into believing abundance is bad and you aren’t supposed to have more than you need, this book may not help you. If you are one of the few with an open mind and your curiosity is piqued, all I ask is that you read this short book in its entirety, twice. Read through once for consumption and a second time for digestion. It is short enough to only take a few reading sessions. Any questions you have will be answered the further you progress and seek to understand.

Lastly, this book is for creatives, unfulfilled workers, and those who fear replacement. People who know they have something more to give the world, but have lost trust in the way they are “supposed” to do things. This book is not meant to be like my others. There is minimal editing or attention put into making things sound fancy. I aim to keep this writing as close to the words my mind wanted to spit out at the time of writing. I am very open to this book being wrong, but no matter the back and forth in my head, I find it silly not to share a perspective that may help another. I hope you enjoy it.