# Employment vs Entrepreneurship

I am going to make a strong prediction here, which may come too early in this book. I do not intend for it to be interpreted as fear mongering. In fact, I intend for it to be one of the most empowering statements. Here it goes: The future of work will consist mostly of entrepreneurs, specifically *creators, *and if not entrepreneurs, elite employees who have the traits of entrepreneurs in increasingly rare positions. The "entry level" is going extinct. This leaves individuals with two options: rely on government support for a basic income with a marginal possibility of living a good life because your mind is controlled by those who it is dependent on or take full responsibility for your future and become an entrepreneur.

In fact, this was a prime driver behind this writing. With endless headlines about job replacement and artificial intelligence matching human capabilities, the future of work is a dark and unknown place. But with this book, I hope to change your viewpoint on that. I hope to equip you with a mind that can adapt, perceive, think, and thrive no matter what the near and far future may hold. Let's begin.

It's unfortunate that "entrepreneurship" and "business" have become dirty words with immature meanings. One mention of them and most people shut off their minds and allow their thoughts to be manhandled by their programming; beliefs they failed to question. Beliefs that entrepreneurship is only for talented or special people. Beliefs that business is complicated, requires a lot of upfront money, or is some kind of industry filled with unethical people. Because of this, we must start by redefining entrepreneurship.

The difference between an employee and entrepreneur is the difference between low agency and high agency. In this context, high-agency individuals are those who create their own goals and actively pursue them without permission from another.* *Low-agency individuals are those who are assigned goals and pursue them because they don't have a mind that allows them to see any other option. True agency can only be developed when you blame yourself for every problem, even when you're not at fault.

When we are young, we have little to no control what purpose is assigned to us. And if we don't have high-agency parents who also understand how the mind works, we become subservient to the dominant paradigm. In this case, that's going to school, getting a job, and retiring at some age with far less than what you were promised.

Most children are plopped in front of a government-trained expert for hours each day soaking in information with the sole purpose of becoming a useful worker. This is not up for debate. The school system serves that which created it: the state. The way you serve the state is by becoming a useful worker, paying your taxes, and obeying the rules like you always have.

Now, this is not all bad. It's necessary in many cases. An interest-based self-education is a freeing path, but unless accounted for, things like grammar, writing, and other useful things taught in schools may be skipped over. Many useful workers can live great lives, but I'm not speaking to them. I'm speaking to my past self. The kid who knew he was meant for more and couldn't stand the thought of an average life.

It is impossible to form an accurate opinion of that which you have not experienced. The same holds true for business and entrepreneurship. By closing your mind to the possibility of creating your own work, you close your mind to discovering your calling. You close yourself off from creating the work from which you can tap into as a source of happiness.

I see assignments from the default path—like schools and jobs—as a stepping-stone. They are useful for skill acquisition, status, and exposure to people, ideas, or interests that can shape your future. My problem with them is that they breed complacency and are dangerous for your psyche. They go against your nature of needing uncertainty, challenge, and constant improvement to thrive.

People climb the ladders placed in front of them because their mind craves challenge. It's rewarding, but you can only climb so high. The challenge will cease to exist unless you take the first step to forging your own path. People inherently know that challenges make life interesting, so they pursue more, but once they reach their limits, they begin justifying their newfound comfort with statements like, "I just like the stability of a job." Then and there, your calling disappears. You eliminate the possibility of further novel challenge. That is dangerous.

Without a challenging, self-generated goal that expands your mind in something as important and life-determining as your work, you drastically slow self-development and throttle your impact, because other domains of your life can only advance as high as your ability to contribute to others through your work. Work, for most people, consumes one-third of their life. If that massive chunk of time is spent in stagnation, stability, and comfort—while also considering how much the effect of your work spills over into every single area of your life—your decline into chaos is inevitable, and you will have difficulty solving that problem, because you are not an entrepreneur.

If you halt your personal evolution by never pursuing something more, you lose purpose, meaning, and fulfillment. This isn’t about achieving a final goal that allows you to opt out of work for the remainder of your life, as that is an impossible delusion that leaves you empty. This is about falling in love with the endless string of problems that expand your circle of concern—from self to others to world to universe—and expand your complexity of self, allowing you to perceive and enjoy the finer things in life. With every problem solved, you increase the potential of unlocking your next layer of evolution. Your mind expands. Your identity expands. Your skill set expands to help more people solve the problems that prevent their own evolution.

Entrepreneurship is the only logical option for long-term thinkers. Entrepreneurship is the path of uncertainty, like slashing your way through a dangerous jungle. You are required to learn skills that aren’t taught in schools. You are required to be okay with failure, rejection, and slow progress. You are required to learn from your mistakes, show up again tomorrow, and push until you strike gold.

This isn’t an argument against jobs or employment. This is an argument for knowing when to evolve your work because it will inevitably lose novelty, progression, and everything else that makes life worth living. If you are wondering where your child-like zest for life went after the progression of your schooling ended, now you know. Being an entrepreneur is hard, but being an eternal employee is harder. Not because of the work, but because of the mind. Self-development is a gateway drug into entrepreneurship because it teaches you that improving others is the next level of improving yourself.

"Employee" and "entrepreneur" are not titles, they are states of mind. They aren't a role you play, but who you are. Employees are rather passive individuals who are told what to learn and work on. Entrepreneurs are assertive individuals who set their own or adopt a shared vision, learn by their own curiosity, and create solutions to the problems of life, pushing humanity forward by distributing empowering products and services. As an entrepreneur, the problems are not defined. You must be in a constant state of movement and let your path reveal them.

Employees are not always entrepreneurs, but entrepreneurs can be employees. Since entrepreneurship is a state of mind, you can have a job and still cultivate a sense of agency. The fundamental understanding is that you, as a developing individual, will eventually have to continue down the unfolding of evolution, and that will demand that you leave, change, or create your work when you have exhausted the level of purpose you can attain. The evolution of your work is a direct reflection of building your vision. Sometimes that entails working at a job you hate, at a startup you love, or on a little creative side project, as long as they fuel your vision.

Stop thinking of entrepreneurship as an unachievable goal reserved for those who want to work long hours to make a pipedream reality. The entire purpose of entrepreneurship is to have full control over your earnings, lifestyle, and suffering by creating solutions to problems. Even when the future of work seems uncertain, true entrepreneurship—creative adaptability to any problem or opportunity—will never go out of style, because problems never go away. The future holds a set of problems that we can't even fathom yet. That should feel liberating.

If you don’t want to work long hours, solve the problem of prioritization. If you like the "stability" of a job, solve the problem of self-management. If you don’t like the way you look, solve the problem of perception or health. If you don’t enjoy your current state of mind, create a solution that allows you to sustainably occupy a new one. These are lofty goals, yes, but if you solve them, you increase your earning capacity with experience, status, and creativity because they force you out of a mindless bubble of comfort.

Entrepreneurs who lack fulfillment aren't entrepreneurs. They may seem like it in their work, but they have the mind of an employee. They are employees to an invisible employer—residue from their programming—that secretly planted a new goal in their head that shapes their ability to identify and solve the right problems. If the entrepreneur could gain awareness of their lack of fulfillment by reorienting their mind, they would be able to solve that problem as they now have awareness of it.

Start thinking of entrepreneurship as other-development, the next logical step after self-development begins. To become valuable, you find purpose in solving the problems that limit your potential. To earn a living from that value, you distribute the solution to your problems to those who suffer from the same. Entrepreneurship is how you contribute to the evolution of humanity, live in accordance with nature, and fulfill your need to survive in a meaningful manner. Those who think we will ever live in a post-survival era are deluded.

The secret is to cultivate a skillset and mindset so impactful to your life that you can’t help but share it with others. You solve your own problems, share the solution that changed your life, and improve humanity as a result. That's the definition of entrepreneurship (in my humble opinion).

Entrepreneurship is an extension of yourself. It is the distribution of your value. It is your connection to something greater. It is your vessel into the unknown. It is your filter for distraction. It is your protection against replacement. It is in your nature to create, give, and survive. Your ancestors were entrepreneurs, but they didn't need a label to do what was in their blood. They each served a role within their tribes, communities, and cultures that gave them purpose. Even if money as we know it wasn’t a thing, they created a meaningful life by cultivating value and distributing it in return for another form of value or profit.

Employment isn't our natural state. Your psyche is wired to hunt, but physical threats aren't an issue anymore. The real threats of today's world are psychological and spiritual. A mental game. We are built for survival, but the question is no longer how to survive; the question is how we evolve beyond and integrate our survival to make life meaningful. That is the goal of this book.

Nobody wants to be a monkey in a cubicle. And I believe deep down everyone feels that pull to achieve something greater. But the longer you suppress that pull, the longer you live in the known where few discoveries can be made. You get bored, depressed, and see life as meaningless because the only novelty you get is from superficial sources. You never take risks, push into the unknown, and discover new knowledge, tools, and potentials that send a signal of meaning to your core.