# The Unignorability of Money

The fastest way to stunt your growth is to demonize money. That is, to view money for something that it is not. This is difficult to do because many people are unaware that their perception of money is the result of social conditioning, but we'll get to that. For now, we need to define what money is, why it controls so many people's lives, and how to approach money now and going into the future where money may take a completely different shape.

Money decomposes into currency and capital. Currency is a medium of exchange. Capital is a store of value. Since this book isn’t about investing or money management, we're going to focus on money as *currency *because the typical dollar we are accustomed to is a rather poor store of value*. *In that sense, money is a neutral *measure* of value sitting between a person and a good or service. When money gets put into a person's hands, the perception of value increases or decreases according to the good or service it is being exchanged for.

How you perceive something as valuable depends on the problems and goals that frame your mind. If you struggle with relationships, and your goal is marriage, you will* *see the value in a niche dating service, presentable clothes, and a curated bouquet of flowers. Someone who is already married or doesn't care for a relationship may not be willing to spend their money on the same things. On the other hand, a monk in a monastery and a businessman on a yacht have different wants that shape what they are willing to purchase. The lesson here is that problems, and therefore your perception of value and money, evolve as you develop certain domains of your life.

Everything starts to go wrong when people are not developed in the financial or psychological domains of their life. People tend to project their beliefs and insecurities on money—absolving themselves of blame—rather than fixing the root problems that led to their dysfunction that may be able to be helped by money. Little do they know, those beliefs and insecurities are not permanent—problems are soluble—and they were probably passed down to them from their parents, teachers, and society at large. Most people who demonize money without critical thought are often not in control of their own mind.

These people are the same ones who despise the leaders of large corporations. They do mental gymnastics to avoid confronting the fact that they got to that point by providing goods or services that provide at least some kind of value to humanity. Some of that value is contrived, yes, but not *all *of it. That alone should be proof enough that money can be used for and generated from something purposeful. These people are also the ones who say they support independent creators but turn on them the minute they try to earn a living from their creations. What used to be a supportive friend or follower quickly turns into a rage-filled creature who will not back down until you conform. They want individuals and businesses to provide free products or services and only rely on charitable donations to stay afloat. It seems like the power they despise from others is a signal of their own lack.

Freeloaders have not understood that free things aren't taken seriously. Value is perception, and if something isn't worth a bit of sacrifice, it probably isn't of much use to your life, and you were only trying to get something for free to collect a short-lived feeling of pleasure. When people pay, they pay attention, because they perceive that thing as important and are more likely to use it to solve a problem in their life. If value lies in transformation, and free products are seen as commodities, the psychologically underdeveloped in the financial domain of life are in a constant war against any form of improvement.

What is more amusing is that everyone in this crowd sells a product or service for the employer they work for. Or they spend their money on mindless pleasures—usually the concoction of a large corporation—rather than something that will improve their life from someone they can relate with, costing them more in the short and long run. If you don't create a product to sell, you will be forced to sell a product for someone else, or you will become the product. If you don't consciously invest money toward the world you want to see, you will unconsciously spend to fill a soul void of purpose.

Even more, the money-haters are selling the idea that selling is bad. They say sales as a skill is manipulative, yet they are hypocritically manipulating their way out of realizing that their life is ruled by money. Sales, marketing, and persuasion are not manipulative when used by developed individuals as a way to educate, inspire, attract, and transform.

Here's the truth: Money is often the one thing holding people back from reaching their next level of personal development. It dictates almost every single action a person takes, even the most developed individuals, because money is deeply intertwined with modern survival. Since the survival state of consciousness is one of reactivity and egocentrism, money can either be seen as some out-of-control domineering master or a tool to expand your consciousness into higher states of care for those around you.

The unignorability of money is real. Why do you work eight hours a day for forty-five years? To pay the bills and support your family. Why do you go off to the woods to live like a monk? So you can pursue personal development, *ignore money* for a bit, but often fail to realize that spirituality isn't about disconnecting from the world, but contributing to it. Why do you eat healthy foods and care about your fitness? To be healthy, yes, but there’s more. You want to increase your perceived value so you can attract better opportunities, advance your career, and make more money. Even if your *main *reason isn't to make money, it is almost always a sub-reason because survival isn’t something we rid ourselves of, but integrate. There is never only one reason behind a person’s actions. Once you realize this, you also realize that the people who you think are "only doing it for the money" to feel better about your own life decisions aren't, in fact, only doing it for the money.

Why are you reading this book? To gain a new perspective, yes, but it will also open your mind to removing the limits on your earning potential. Almost every action you take has money attached as a reason. To think this is bad is self-deception. Like a skill tree in a video game, you need money to unlock new paths. To achieve health, you need money. To achieve fulfilling relationships, you need to solve the problem that destroys most of them . . . money. To enjoy life, you need to progress toward a meaningful goal and distribute the value you acquire along the way. You need to build. Building requires resources. Resources require money. Notice that I'm not saying you need millions of dollars to live well; I am saying that you need money as you already do. For most people, enough is not much, but *how that money is made *is also a factor to consider.

It is a popular idea that once you reach a few million dollars a year in income, more money won't help you live a better life. You can do most things that rich people can do, and you already have the same phone and technology that rich people have. But I'm skeptical. This feels like a shallow half-truth. The world doesn't need more fortune-cookie advice that discourages improvement in the financial domain of life. Most people have not reached that level, and even fewer people have reached beyond that level.

You don't *need* more than a few million, sure, but money isn't only about buying material to fill your life with. That's a rather poor use of money. Money is a great tool to continue a life of novelty and challenge. You know, the thing that disappears after you graduate school and get acquainted with your job. Not because it allows you to buy material items. Not because it buys happiness directly. But because it buys the resources to solve more challenging problems since time and labor only go so far. Further, by solving those problems, you have the capacity to pass down novel solutions. Both are critical for *depth *of happiness.

When you ignore the need, not want, for money, you limit the development of your mind, body, and spirituality. If you live in a stressful cloud of never-ending responsibilities solved by money, you cannot become aware of the depth that life has to offer. The only people who view this as some form of oppression are those who lack agency. And at that point, money is the least of your worries.

This is why I stress the path of entrepreneurship. If you don’t start a business that provides information, education, goods, services, or the rest that make a better humanity, then unethical people rise to the top without competition. You are indirectly contributing to evil by ignoring your entrepreneurial and agentic human nature. By doing nothing but demonizing money and businesses that are the lifeblood of civilization, you are assigned work where the employer is more than likely unethical by your standards.

You won’t start a business because of your delusional assumptions and conditioning that it is unethical to make money—but you are working for a business that makes the population sick, contributes to bombing people across the world, and locks employees into mechanical routines so they wouldn’t dare achieve their potential. And even if you aren't working *for *that business, you are more than likely connected to them by relationship, allowing them to survive with the work you do carry out. The greatest act of rebellion toward the money-centric culture you despise is to make more of it, with purpose. Funny, isn't it?

If humanity is only as strong as its weakest link, and most people continue to suffer from the same problems, and true education is what allows the *individual* to solve their own problems (rather than assigning general temporary relief), and problems are what prevent personal to collective evolution, and if the education system is focused on training people to be useful workers for their own benefit (because you aren't the one paying for that education system), and finally, if the fate of humanity depends on conscious leaders to educate, inspire, and attract, then the tech-enabled emergence allowing for everyone to distribute their value globally is one realistic path out of this mess. We'll make sense of that later.

By choosing to do nothing, you accept the path of assignments and allow people less conscious and intelligent than you to have more attention, impact, and money than you. The only way you can stop people from paying attention to one thing is to give them something more attractive to pay attention to.

I ask this for perspective, not to trigger a reaction: If you hate money, do you not hate your life? Everything around you right now, from the phone in your hands to the roads you drive on to the desk you sit at to the food that keeps you alive, is a product of a business that makes money for its contribution to the advancement of civilization. You are drowning in a world built by the drive of money stemming from survival and status. There are obvious flaws with this system, but building a potential solution is almost always a better option than casting a tiny vote.

Now, the next elephant in the room is the labor theory of value. The belief that through pure hard work you can make a lot of money. The fact of the matter is that you can work hard at anything, but that doesn’t mean it’s useful. You can put four years of work into getting a degree. You can put ten years of work into climbing a corporate ladder. You can put thousands of hours of blood, sweat, and tears into writing a book. And still, you may not be paid anywhere close to what you want, because hours worked does not guarantee that anyone will care.

So, rather than taking your future into your own hands, the popular option is to whine and complain. *I deserve to be paid more! I’ve spent fourteen years working hard and this is all I get for it? I barely have any time for my family. I don’t have enough to take a vacation. I slave away with no light at the end of the tunnel.*

The world's complainers are missing one crucial piece of the puzzle. People invest in things they care about, see the importance of, or consider useful for their lives. Nobody is going to give you, independently, money if your work doesn’t benefit them in some way.

The labor theory of value is that you should be paid for the amount of work you do. To feel as if you have jumped through hoops. To feel like you deserve something for struggling just like every other person on this planet. But that’s not how reality works. The amount of money you make is directly correlated to how valuable you are: the level of problems you solve, the results from the solutions you create, and your ability to inspire and persuade people to know and care about your creation.

If you aren't happy with how much you make, it may be time to take a brutally honest look at what you contribute to the world. It does not make sense to pay someone based on the amount of work they do, especially in a future where that work will be more efficient, worth less, and require fewer resources to complete. However, it does make sense to pay someone based on the level of problems they solve, as problems constantly evolve as work does. No matter how far technology goes, problems will continue to emerge.

If enjoyment comes from the feeling of progress being made, connection to something greater than yourself, and receiving meaningful feedback from both, then conscious entrepreneurship is how you sustain and control the enjoyment in your life. And by filling your own cup, you begin to overflow, and your natural desire shifts to helping other people.

Humans have created a way to enhance and transcend their survival with money as a baseline to trade value and create the desire to build new tools and technology. If money didn't exist, the luxuries you have today wouldn't exist. The history of money goes back 40,000 years, but trading beads and seashells don't cut it anymore. Why? Because we don't live in small tribes. Nobody is going to trade you a car—that helps you do things that weren't fathomable in the past—for a pile of a million seashells. Even further, charitable donations aren't going to take you to the moon. The dollar, on the other hand, is something the recipient can take and trade for something they deem valuable.

There's one thing we know for certain: The future of money is going to be more digital than today. Money *will *evolve beyond the dollar, as it has evolved beyond seashells. The way we use money will also evolve. With artificial intelligence moving faster than we could have imagined, who knows what the ongoing material use of money will be when cost of living moves closer to zero. Money could take the form of attention or status. Money as we know it could become meaningless. But that doesn't change the fact that entrepreneurship, solving problems, and creating value is one of, if not the only, worthwhile path to take. If we bet on human nature, which we should, money will likely continue to play a massive role in those endeavors.