# Levels of Purpose

Any serious consideration for what you should do in this life must start with the question, "Who should I become?" Of course, that question carries many more, like "Why am I here?" and "Why does this matter?" For the Pythagoreans, the world was viewed as a Kosmos. We usually translate this as "cosmos,” but the original Greek meaning was used to describe the universe as an ordered and harmonious system. This is the complete opposite of the reductionist, merely physical universe we mean today. The difference is that one views the world as a whole greater than the sum of its parts, maintaining respect for the parts, while the other views the world as just parts.

To the Greeks, the universe wasn't composed of atoms or matter; it was composed of these "whole parts." Everything was a whole in itself but also a part of something greater than itself. Each part served a purpose toward the harmony of the Kosmos. Understand that the world does, in fact, contain what we call atoms and matter, and while for certain types of science this is useful, it often leaves us lost in a winter storm when it comes to why we are here and what we must do.

Arther Koestler, in an attempt to reconcile this problem, coined the term *holon, *which* *is a combination of the Greek word "holos," meaning "whole," and the suffix "-on," which denotes a particle or part (as in proton or neutron). In other words, *whole parts*. Atoms are both whole and parts of molecules. Molecules are both whole and parts of cells. Cells are both whole and parts of organs. This natural—not to be confused with dominator—hierarchy, or "holarchy," continues up, down, left, and right. Organs to organisms to ecosystems. Letters to words to sentences to paragraphs while words can be parts of the lyrics of a song. One paragraph can discuss fire, while another can discuss water. Water evaporates, condenses in shade-providing clouds, rains down into life-sustaining streams, and finds its way back to the ocean. The universe can be thought of as uni-verse: one beautiful and ever-evolving song.

While this universal order can be used to enhance your thinking and problem solving, it also points toward something more profound: Reality consists of a great chain of knowing and being. Matter to body to mind to soul to spirit. Even further, it points to levels of development such as egocentric, ethnocentric, worldcentric, planetcentric, and Kosmocentric. Individuals, cultures, and societies all move through these levels of development. These macro levels illustrate their circle of concern: Care for their self, their tribe, other humans, other beings, and reality itself. In other words, you're increasing your capacity *for *care. Humans find fulfillment in caring for others, like how you may be better at taking care of your dog than you are at taking care of yourself. The more you can care for others—through the progressive overload of responsibility or training with emotional weights—the more fulfillment you receive. In this sense, money isn't the only form of profit. One could consider it their life's work to evolve through these stages to contribute to humanity at their highest potential. Note that you do not break free from lower levels. You do not break free from the care of your family for the care of an animal. You integrate the former into the latter.

Other philosophers, like Alan Watts, speak of the world as an organism. A functioning *ecosystem *bound by relationship. Aristotle believed that the final cause of a thing is its function, and that a full explanation of anything must consider its final cause. This presents the fields of teleology and cybernetics.

Teleology (*telos *meaning goal, *logos *meaning reason) is the idea of explaining something by referring to its purpose, end, or goal. Cybernetics studies how systems self-regulate and self-organize toward the end goal of a system. It comes from the word *kybernetikos, *which means "to steer" or "good at steering." Similar to the Nature's Compass concept we will discuss in a future chapter, acting toward a goal, sensing where you are, comparing to the goal, and steering in the right direction like a ship blown off course. Trial and error. While the Kosmos illustrates the overarching order, cybernetics illustrates how to move through each stage toward a greater purpose.

My reason for illustrating these concepts is to provide you with a non-dogmatic highest order from which you can orient your life. A direction. An aim. Kosmos, teleology, and cybernetics can all be integrated as a high and holistic perspective to orient your decision-making and discover a sense of meaning for your existence. It doesn't matter if you believe in a God or not. You can directly observe and experience the *properties *of this grand harmonious system.

Now is a good time to distinguish *vertical *development from *horizontal *development. At each macro level, individuals can expand their capacity at each level through knowledge and skill acquisition (horizontal). Advancing to a new level, after a certain amount of time and effort in it, can often open their mind to new perspective. By doing so, they can observe their previous level, integrate many aspects of it, and transcend into a more holistic baseline state of consciousness. The problem is, people can, and often do, get trapped in any given level leading to psychic entropy and an unnecessary number of problems that *can't be solved *without a higher level of mind. Much of the time, individuals go through a period of intense pain until they get fed up with their lack of progress. Their mind is able to "flip the switch" and break through to the next level. To understand this best, we must understand the essence of *problems.*

### Problems Are the Path

You can only become as successful as the identity you expand into, and problems are the limits on that expansion. That is, problems are the limits on your potential. When you solve problems and remove your limits, you become more complex, more skilled, more knowledgeable, more open, more connected to reality. With each problem you solve, the perceived difficulty of life goes down, and your level of purpose goes up.

Problems keep your attention boxed within the boundaries of those problems. Why does this matter? First, you may have difficulty seeing life for what it is. Second, you can't seem to find your passions or interests. You struggle to find a challenge that you actually want to take on. So, you search and search within the little bubble of awareness confined by your problems and start to feel like you’re trapped, or that there isn’t anything more than what you can see.

If your mind is consumed by how you look in the mirror, how tired you feel every day, your lack of a partner or mate, all the bills you have to pay, and the job you don't care to go to, it becomes obvious why your life doesn't seem that great. People will tell you to accept your situation and find joy in it, which is a good idea, but that is a band-aid solution that won’t heal the inner voice begging you to discover your potential.

Humans find joy in solving problems. In other words, we find joy in what we choose to suffer for. Our mind narrows on the challenge. We identify room for growth. We plan, educate ourselves, and acquire the skill that increases the power of our mind and self. We see progress as feedback and learn what it means to be fulfilled.

Now, you can only solve a problem once you expand your mind beyond the problem. You need to stop, zoom out, and open your mind to view your problems from a higher perspective. From there, you can create a goal that opposes the problem, collect ideas that form a theory, and experiment with potential solutions until the problem is solved. Once it's solved, you solidify a new level of purpose.

From my experience, I've noted four macro levels of purpose. These are like big milestones in your development. These apply to each domain of your life and your life as a whole. By domain of life, I mean things like your work, relationships, finances, health, energy, and sense of well-being. For the sake of this book, I will be providing examples relating to money.

With this philosophy, none of these levels are bad or "less than" another. They are simply developmental stages. They are guides to identify where you are at in your development. We can think of problems existing at each level as increasing in selflessness and decreasing in selfishness. Meaning, you can't avoid being selfish at the start. The purpose of money changes as you develop yourself. Your purpose shapes how you perceive situations. You need to solve the superficial problems like health, money, and confidence before you can even think about solving deeper problems like spirituality and meaning. In fact, spirituality and meaning are found in solving the problems themselves.

### 1. Survival

The survival level of purpose is the starting point for most people. That point when you haven't begun to pursue your own path in life. All you know are the goals you've been assigned and what that worldview has allowed you to notice and learn. You are doing what you've been told to do to survive. You don't pay attention to the default lifestyle you've accepted by society, and it slowly chains you into a narrow-minded state.

All you can pay attention to are the bills you need to pay, the argument you had with your spouse, the job you don't want to go to. You're living the same experience over and over again. Your mind is stuck in the predictable future and familiar past. You wake up, think about the stressors ahead of you for that day that also happened yesterday, tolerate them, go to bed, and repeat the process.

You believe money is difficult to make. You think making money has a luck factor when luck is a concept used to describe a lack of understanding of a system. You don't see money as a domain of mastery like fitness, mental health, or relationships. You may believe money is evil, which limits your ability to make it, trapping you in your cloud of problems. You don't think you can make a lot of money in your field, or just haven't chosen a field to develop yourself in. You aren't interested in becoming an entrepreneur for various reasons, but those reasons are often a failure to uncover your programming. In survival mode, you can't see your higher potential and make the connection that, at some point, entrepreneurship is a necessary aspect of achieving it.

The first step to advance from survival to status is to become deeply aware of the beliefs that hold you back and how, when gone unchecked, create a ripple effect of destruction in your life. The second step is orienting your focus from problem to solution. In a sense, you must become so disgusted with yourself and your situation that you have no choice but to use that negative energy to commit to something positive.

Start where you are. Focus on solving the problems that are staring you straight in the face. Your money problems. Your energy problems. Your health problems. Your relationship problems. Immerse yourself in environments and education that begins to change the goals your mind operates on. Block out time to work on improving the value you have to offer. Acquire complementary skills to the ones you use in your job or career. Experiment with side projects. Expose yourself to massive experience until you are able to make enough money to see beyond your survival.

### 2. Status

The only people who did well, and do well, in society were those who had power and influence. The people who put effort into their goals became valuable, built businesses, built their body, and built their mind to increase their capacity for wealth—the ability to create. There has never been a time in history where weak, average, or mindless people weren't treated like cattle. Now, stick with me here. If I come off as arrogant, I may be just that, but there is more to the story.

The mentors of the past and present that you look up to, like Gautama Buddha, Jesus Christ, Plato, Krishna, or any other influential individual you hold in high regard have a high degree of status and power. Otherwise, their message would not have captured your attention, persuaded you to change your mind and behavior, and persisted for thousands of years. But that’s the thing, they didn’t have a marketing budget, they had a message. A life’s work to spread. That was the source of their power. My point is that you only view status as bad because of the code written in your head by people who failed to question their assumptions. Or, you simply have a half-perspective of what power is, and you tend to bias the negative.

Some people will naturally filter into being average and weak, as there are weak stars and plants, but it is the duty of the strong to bear the load of responsibility. Once you reach the contribution level, you realize that a sole purpose of yours is to do just that. To solve bigger, more meaningful problems that increase the baseline level of purpose of humanity. But you can only do that once you've attained some form power and influence. Once you've created the art, products, or services that improve the lives of the recipients. Once you've built the body that reflects the character by which you interact with the world. Once you've built the mind that harnesses power with persuasion, not force or deception.

This is one problem with today's teachers and gurus. They are respectfully developed in the mental or contemplative domain of life, but they are often sickly or overweight and verifiably sexist or racist. People pedestalize these everyday humans for their rare development and latch onto their beliefs out of blind ignorance. They reject the manifest world of money, food, and sex as that rejection is inherent to the purely ascending philosophies that arose during the axial period. They failed to integrate the descending. They lost their grounding by identifying with what they deem "pure" out of *desire for status *that they can cover up with the guise of spirituality*.* They haven't broken through the superficial perception of money and value exchange as the world evolved. They haven't realized that contemplative development is, in fact, separate and holds equal importance to development within lines such as aesthetic, cognitive, emotional, ethical, interpersonal, mathematical, moral, and those that make up your basic needs. I am not trying to knock down these great leaders. I am trying to expose their humanity. That you can, and should, learn from them, but there is much, much more to learn.

The status level of purpose is reached when you feel a sense of security around money. You have a skill set that allows you to pursue a new career or start a business. That career or business allows you to pay the bills, focus on other areas of your life, and make moderate to extravagant purchases.

This is where many people continue to reside because they get trapped in the materialist paradigm. You haven't found your calling, so you don't have a guiding light that is greater than yourself. You get stuck in the superficial and lose sight of the depth. You like the job title more than you enjoy the challenge of the problem. You like the expensive watch more than you enjoy the brand's mission and craftsmanship. Neither of these are bad, but if you find yourself stuck in this narrow view, things can become bad very fast.

The trap of traps is trying to avoid this stage. You try to jump to spirituality without the experience and mistakes that breed spirituality. You don't realize you are using your spirituality as a status symbol in and of itself. You often use it to garner attention and power from how others perceive you. That's why many start down the spiritual path. They see someone of higher consciousness, admire them, desire to be like them, and start imitating them. That's a status game, and that's okay. You simply need to be conscious of it, so it doesn't do more harm than good in your life.

I am giving you permission to pursue your desire for acceptance through power. Start training so you can look good even if it seems vain to other people. Start the business to make money as that's the only way to control what you create, who you create for, and its impact on the world. You may not care about that now, but as you fulfill your status needs, your mind will begin to open and notice things you couldn't have before.

You find spirituality in experience. You find it in the story of creating your own way. You find it in the highs and lows of pursuing goals and solving problems. You find it in correcting the mistakes you made and *learning *how to move in a better direction. Spirituality comes from the journey, but that journey is only possible with a conscious destination. If you can't find meaning in life, it's because you haven't started pursuing the goals you've been suppressing because you’ve been tricked into thinking they’re bad.

### 3. Creativity

Once you've achieved some level of status, your mind will start to transform. And if you don't close your mind, you'll begin to realize all your mistakes. You may even feel the need to reject everything you've acquired. You won't find the same joy you used to in those superficial pursuits. The money gets old. The cars and watches get old. Much of your material acquisition gets old.

That doesn't mean everything you did was a waste. You have a vast vat of experience to pull from and pass down to those who may need it. In the creativity level, you begin to realize your value. You have the desire to break away from external dependencies and assignments. At this point, your focus must shift to developing a philosophical sense of mastery around a few key pursuits.

For fitness fanatics, going to the gym starts as a pursuit to feel good about themselves. After a few years, they either quit, or they reorient toward a new, deeper destination that makes the journey more meaningful. They find joy in feeling good from healthy food and movement. They have a deep understanding of how their health choices impacts their future. They gain fulfillment from the process of making tiny improvements with their training. They integrate the finite game and fall in love with the infinite.

In the status stage, much of what you learn and do will be from what others teach you. In the creativity stage, you take your expanded knowledge and begin to create your own way of doing things. You've tried different training regimens, business models, and coping strategies to the point of realizing the patterns and principles between them all. You've unlocked a perspective that allows you to navigate intersecting domains with grace.

Your job in the creativity stage is to simply create. Experiment. Break free from the dogmas and ideologies and processes you've adopted from others. Build novel solutions from scratch. Try everything and see what sticks. It may take some time, but this is where you discover what you were meant to do, even if it's not absolutely clear. A vague idea of your full potential sets you up nicely for the contribution stage.

### 4. Contribution

At some point—I can’t put an exact timeframe on it—you will understand the second half of creation: contribution. You come full circle and realize that art must be merged with business for that art to take full effect. You feel a deep desire to share the things that have improved your life. You will see life from a new lens and wonder why others are constantly distracted with menial things. You can see where their life is heading, but they can't.

The contribution stage is where the separate domains of your life collapse into one. You don't see work as somewhere that you clock in and clock out. You don't see rest as a treat that you can only indulge in once work is done. You don't see play as a hobby that lasts thirty minutes at night if you have the time to do it. You see all of them as necessary counterbalances to one another. Work, rest, and play become difficult to distinguish.

Rest becomes a way to regenerate your creative ability for your work. Play becomes what you do for work. Work is so deeply integrated with your life that anything you do can pay back tenfold in more ways than cash. Your footsteps leave pits of value in their path.

Your entire life begins to revolve around how you can best contribute to the world. You become a perspective vessel for reality. The true value lies in the mind you’ve developed, and you are able to adopt the perspective of a strategist or visionary. You hunt for and gather information, synthesize it with your experience, and distribute it to those who want to benefit from it. You become less of a leech. You don't only consume and take from reality for your selfish personal gain, but you create, share, and contribute back to the world.

The four levels of purpose listed above are just that. They are general worldviews. They are the vantage point from which you perceive and act on opportunities. Understand that you can, and should, contribute to others’ lives even if you are in the survival stage. Understand that you can be creative at any time even if you are deep in a status game.

Survival, status, creativity, and contribution are simply labels that best encapsulate the general outlook on life one has. With that said, there is a path to move through these levels faster. This isn't a set and strict path that someone can give you (whether that be in school or from a guru, those are simply processes you can experiment with).

The best path to take is the one you create for yourself. But understand there *is *a best "meta" path *to *create your own path. The path is illustrated by the main domains of your life. Mind, body, relationships, and work. The health and development of each.

The peculiar one that needs much attention is "work." Work is a major part of life. It determines much of what you learn and do. It determines what you spend most of your time on. Because of that, it determines much of your development. So, the "best" path to take is a commitment to discovering and pursuing your life's work.

You can't do that in a job, although a job can be a stepping-stone toward it. A job is the "secure" and "safe" route touted by those who haven't discovered the depth of life. It can quickly chain you to responsibilities that narrow your mind and drain your energy. You can't effectively pursue your life's work by neglecting your relationships and mental and physical health.

If you are passionate about your work, late nights and bad habits will impact your ability to create. If you aren't serious about your work, these problems won't register in your mind as problems. They will stick around and lead to entropy. When your work demands your best self, the path to developing your mind, body, and relationships becomes clear. You must uphold them or else your work suffers.

The answer, again, is entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship spans across all levels of mind. It solves survival, aids in status, allows for creativity, and results in contribution. Entrepreneurship requires you to be a generalist, not a narrow-minded specialist that limits your perspective and development beyond that specialization. Entrepreneurship requires you to escape starving artistry. You must transcend your selfish desires to do random work that others don't perceive as valuable. Entrepreneurship requires you to be conscious of your impact. You have much responsibility in how large you grow and how that influences the evolution of consciousness.

You have the path; now you must learn to navigate it.