# Progress and Knowledge

You aren't where you want to be because you don't have the knowledge to be there. In the broadest sense, a person's quest for a better life is, as David Deutsch puts it, "a search problem, in an abstract space of ideas far too large to be searched exhaustively." As we break free from the known goals, systems, and comforts our mind adopts to maintain a sense of security, how do we explore this vast idea space in the search for new knowledge that equips us with the power to do what we want? How do we navigate the unknown, in the right direction, in a way that leads to progress in our personal lives and in society? How do we pursue our purpose? We'll get to that, but we need to cover a few bases so your mind is primed for understanding.

Now would be a good time to bring up the elephant in the room: *artificial intelligence*. To understand what AI is and what it means for us, we need to start at the origin of that term. Before AI, there was *cybernetics*, an idea laid out by Norbert Wiener in 1948. Cybernetics—ancient Greek for "helmsman" or another word for "governor"—is the idea of automatic, self-regulating control in a system. Acting, sensing, and comparing to a goal is a fundamental loop to intelligent systems. His key insight was that the world should be understood in terms of information. That complex systems like organisms, brains, and societies error-correct toward a goal, and if these feedback loops break down, the system breaks down.

Intelligent information systems—or life—can be observed as a tightrope walker's constant adjustments. As they cross the wire, each tiny wobble sends a signal to their brain. Their body responds by shifting right, then adjusting again and again to stay balanced. This back-and-forth flow of information keeps them stable. Similarly, a ship approaching a lighthouse at night uses constant feedback. The captain sees they're drifting left of the light, steers right, then adjusts again when they've gone too far right. These small corrections, based on steady streams of information, keep complex things working smoothly. But if the feedback stops—if the tightrope walker gets dizzy or the lighthouse goes dark—the system falls into chaos. This knowledge will come in handy later.

Two years after Wiener's introduction to cybernetics, he published *The Human Use of Human Beings. *Now out of print, the central idea relevant to today's world is: "We must cease to kiss the whip that lashes us." Wiener knew the danger was not in machines becoming more like humans but humans being treated like machines.

Around this time, a new perception of technology emerged that by inventing computers, we had externalized our central nervous system—our minds—and that we all now shared one singular mind. One infinite intelligence. All potential information at our fingertips. Unfortunately, we don't hear much about cybernetics today. Why? Because this new perception fueled poor incentives. Wieners's warnings about intelligent machines ran counter to the aspirations of his colleagues, who were interested in the commercialization of new technologies. They wanted to profit from this. Second, John McCarthy, a computer pioneer, disliked Wiener. He refused to use the term "cybernetics" and instead coined "artificial intelligence," becoming a founding father in that field.

With the meteoric rise in discussion around intelligent machines, we're left wondering what makes humans special or if we were even special to begin with. For being the only species that's made it to the moon, there has to be something there, right?

David Deutsch, influenced by Karl Popper, believes there is, and it lies in our ability to create infinite knowledge. It starts with the need for creativity. The process by which all knowledge that is created happens through conjecture and criticism. Trial and error. Variation and selection (in Darwinian terms). In other words, guessing and correcting one's guess is how you accomplish anything you set your mind to. This is how we learn, innovate, make progress, and understand almost anything in the universe. This is how we discover unknown goals or ideas and achieve known goals or ideas.

Deutsch believes that humans are "universal explainers." That we are capable of understanding anything that is understandable within the realm of possibility. We create explanatory theories that reveal the deep structure of reality, allowing us to guess and predict in a more efficient way that breeds faster progress with time. This knowledge allows us to understand things we've never directly experienced, like stars and galaxies. We can understand what a star is by viewing it through a telescope, but that only comes after the explanatory knowledge of how that telescope changes how we perceive the star. Just as a universal computer can compute anything computable (that we now have in our pockets), humans can understand anything that is understandable. And if we don't yet understand it, we eventually can.

The reason many people are worried about the future is because artificial intelligence and it's more evolved forms *may* render humans irrelevant. This is not the case. There is not a limit to what humans can compute if we either augment our brains or use the devices in our pockets for more than rotting our brains. There are no limits to what we can transform—or turn raw materials into things like rockets—given the right knowledge. There is no difference between the basic order of operations that we as humans can perform that AI can somehow surpass. Further, there is no limit to the transformative ideas that AI can come up with that we cannot.

Beyond that, humans may have a slight edge when it comes to *attention*. We have the ability to change our focus by changing our perspective. When a problem occurs, we can adopt a perspective that allows us to solve it. If we want to build a rocket, asking the old gods to do it for us won't help. We can change lenses to view the situation in a way that allows for new opportunities. If we want mental peace, spirituality will help, but if one gets locked in that paradigm, they may struggle with the practical aspects of life. These perspectives we can change like lenses on a camera are backed by consciousness and experience, one thing that AI may never fully grasp, but my perspective stays open to the possibility that it one day may.

The point is that you can achieve anything within the realm of possibility, but only if you have the knowledge to do so and a perspective that allows you to apply that knowledge. You are not doomed to the default path of society or the rule of intelligent machines. Now, on the topic of knowledge, it serves two functions. The first is to make specific things happen, preferably good things rather than bad. The second is to capture patterns in reality. This allows us to store information in an efficient way so that we aren't always starting from scratch in our pursuits. We understand big-picture concepts like the sun rising and falling each day and seasons changing every so often. Without this understanding, much of our lives would fall apart. Capturing patterns allows us to plan by proximity. We understand that we would freeze to death in a cold environment, so we use deposits of knowledge like a jacket and hotel to keep us warm while we travel.

This doesn't take away from the fact that most people feel lost. It's nice to know that you can achieve anything you want, but how do you create the knowledge that allows you to do so? The answer lies in the unknown. The undefined. In using your agency to take the step out of what you know is possible, or what has been defined by another as possible for you. To set a new goal—even if, and especially if, it leads to uncertainty—and navigate through the dark until you strike gold.

Think of the unknown as a universal map with light and dark spots. The light spots are areas you've explored. The dark spots are where your potential lies. This map is a surface area for ideas that can be discovered and tested against reality to verify their validity. When those results do not move you closer toward your goal, or move you further from that, a problem is revealed, and you must error correct toward the goal. It may sound simple, but as life proves, this is a difficult process. But here's the thing, your purpose is the source of your struggle, and nobody said that struggle can't be fun.

The fundamental problem, or problem of all problems, is that people rarely dive into the unknown and fail to recognize that as *the *problem that begins their problem-solving journey. This mostly comes down to conditioning, identity, and perception. You don't become aware of good problems because you don't have a goal that those problems prevent you from achieving. You don't prioritize health, so nutrient-deficient food and sluggishness pass you by as problems to solve. You don't have high standards for the money in your wallet, so you don't register that as a problem that sparks the desire to create your life's work. Without problems, there is no creativity. Without creativity, there is no life. A life without problems is a life without purpose. You have no reason to step into the unknown, discover ideas, create knowledge, deposit it as a contribution, and live fully. Problems, like ideas, are infinite. There will never be a time when we rid our lives of problems. There will only be a time with better problems to solve. There is no final destination. If there is any point in your life where you are not wrestling with a meaningful problem (this includes mindfulness, meditation, and other forms of spirituality that make it seem as if you *aren't *solving the problem of an entropic mind), it is safe to say that you are not in the process of producing value or creating the potential to contribute to something greater than yourself. You lose purpose.

It's wise to note that there is an enemy of progress. When you encounter a problem—or a conflict between where you are and where you want to be—entropy has the potential to increase. Entropy, in brief, is that all systems fall into chaos unless an effort is made to maintain order. A dirty room is a simple example. Your room starts out clean, but if you don't have a system for maintaining it, slowly, then all at once, the room will become a disordered mess, making it much harder to regain order. It may start off as an unmade bed with a few shirts or socks on the floor, but soon enough, it becomes a wasteland that would make your mother go insane. When applied to the mind, entropy plays a much more pressing role.

We've learned that animals are different from humans in that they thrive within a specific niche while humans build tools to thrive in any niche, but we haven't learned *why *humans do this. Animals survive on the physical level. They attempt to reproduce the information in their genes. Humans do the same, but they also survive on the conceptual level. They attempt to reproduce the information in their consciousness. Whether this is some form of evolved extended phenotype is up for debate, but the explanation holds up. Humans protect and prolong their identity, or self, through concepts because it is a concept. We write books to spread our mental seed, we argue our beliefs when our identity is threatened, and we invent conceptual knowledge to survive when our genes can no longer handle that job.

The sources of psychic entropy, or the mind falling into chaos, are boredom and anxiety. Both stem from a mismatch of your skill level and the challenge of a situation. If your skill is too high and the challenge is too low, you get bored. Boredom leads to self-centeredness. Your mind starts thinking of something better, and often more pleasurable, that it could be doing with its time. If your skill is too low and the challenge is too high, you get anxious. Anxiety leads to self-consciousness. Your mind starts thinking of how it's not good enough. In both scenarios, one thought leads to another until you find yourself drowning. One thought about your strained breathing could lead to one hundred more about difficult food choices, routines, doctors’ offices, bad news, having a heart attack and more unless you refocus your attention on what you can do right now to solve the problem.

When you stay in the known or latch onto to your current way of life that probably wasn't chosen by you, boredom sets in, and you begin wondering why your life is getting worse while your days remain the same. Most people's lives are determined by how they choose to cure their boredom. When you decide to step into the unknown, you are effectively reinventing yourself. You are reborn. And when you are born, you are vulnerable. There is little order and a whole lot of chaos. Stay mindful of this. The first leap into a new way of life will have a buffer period of high anxiety. This is nature's way of testing how serious you are about seeing what you're capable of.

The key to reversing entropy is to dance between boredom and anxiety. To take on challenges that are just above your skill level. You wouldn't try to fight a level fifty if you were a level one, and you wouldn't care to fight a level one if you were a level fifty. When you shoot just above your weight, you find the magic you're looking for. You've felt it before. When you're living at the edge of your abilities. The flow state. Locked in. You feel invincible. Nothing else matters but the task in front of you. You become one with the problem. You move with purpose. People gravitate toward you because you have something they've lost. Your life's work is to maximize your time in this optimal state of ordered consciousness, to any greater or lesser degree, because this is when you create a reality worth living in. This happens when mental energy—or attention—is invested in your plan. A hierarchy of goals that reprograms how you view the world when your skill matches the challenge of an opportunity.

I call this Nature's Compass. True learning. Engaging with the process of trial and error, creation and destruction, secure and insecure. The oscillation of life. Like a ship heading toward a lighthouse in a storm. You may get blown off course, but it is a test of your intelligence and skill to be able to sense where you are, realize you are, in fact, off course, and steer in the right direction. Again, it would not be wise to hop in a boat in the middle of the ocean if you are not a skilled navigator. Start where you are but challenge yourself.

This is how you acquire an interest-based education. You view your life as a story that unfolds in chapters, phases, and cycles. Each chapter has goals, problems, highs, and lows that reveal themselves as the pages turn. Each chapter is a macrocycle of life. Once you understand it, you can identify which part of the story you are in, become aware of its components, and ease your mind until you enter the next phase. The cycle is composed of three phases.

**You feel lost.** You don’t know what to pursue next. You’ve solved a problem, achieved a goal, and thought it was the end. For most people, this happens either when they leave school or stay at a job until the challenge is no longer novel. In the lost phase, you are attempting to notice a problem. Boredom or anxiety are the signals. If you listen to them, you will become curious as to how you can overcome them.

**You become interested.** You experiment with different topics, interests, ideas, techniques, and solutions until you become fully aware that you are, in fact, able to solve that problem. It becomes your purpose. In the context of a job, after becoming fully aware that it is a problem preventing your growth, your mind actively seeks information to solve that problem.

**You become obsessed.** You dive deeper into that crevice of reality. You can’t stop learning and building toward your goal. You start to realize that your problem wasn't as shallow as you thought. You discover that to start a business, you need to learn persuasion. To learn persuasion, you must understand the mind. To understand the mind, you must understand reality. And before you know it, what started as a money problem becomes a deepened understanding of reality itself. This is the power of an interest-based education if you don't get distracted from the endless string of problems or the greater purposes that lie ahead.

**The cycle repeats.** Once that cycle ends, a new one begins, and you will feel lost once more. You've stacked few interests, which is great, but you still feel as if you are just dipping your toes in. However, you are now at a level of mind that can start to solve deeper, more challenging problems. When you feel lost, here are a few things you can try to collect vision (or ideas that culminate into solutions).

**Experiment inward.** Rest. Nap. Journal. Walk. Embrace silence. Observe and deconstruct your thoughts. Attempt to catch a signal of opportunity. Follow your thoughts to a root problem. Reject your stupid busy life and set aside time for deep contemplation.

**Experiment outward.** Learn. Read. Scroll. Build. Try new things. Refocus on the only things that matter in life. Health, wealth, relationships, happiness. Experiment with techniques that invest energy into a goal. Any goal. During the experimentation phase, you are trying to accumulate new experiences until your next quest becomes visible.

Like a game, you are at a point where the quest is still locked, but you don’t have any other to pursue. You have to fumble around in the dark until you find a dimly lit candle off in the distance. If you lose your mind, you won't notice it.

Now, understand that there is no time limit for this phase. It could last weeks, months, or years. You must stick it out until you accumulate enough vision to stop going wide and start going deep. When you progress through the lost phase and become interested, you must act fast to turn that into obsession. The experimentation never ends.

**Experiment downward.** The secret is to try everything until you find that one thing that you can't pull yourself away from. When you find that one thing, go deep. Learn everything you can about that domain. Dissect all perspectives and avoid becoming dogmatic about one.

In nutrition, collect perspective and patterns from veganism, keto, carnivore, flexible dieting, and other ideologies until you are confident enough to create your own that is closer to truth. In business, collect from e-commerce, freelancing, software, and other models until you note the principles that bring clarity to your own endeavors.

The only way to solve problems for good is through obsessive self-experimentation. Otherwise, it is a band-aid. A prescription. An assignment. And you know the dangers of locking your mind into someone else's prison. People can diagnose and prescribe a solution to your problems, but they lack regard for the difference in perspective, goals, and experience from those prescribing the solutions. You will never have access to another person's state of mind, and they will never have access to yours. This is the essence of human uniqueness.

**Experiment upward.** Persistence and iteration. I’m assuming that once you’ve found your obsession you want to make it a consistent part of your life. This means you must earn a creative income from that interest. You must integrate it into your entrepreneurial path.

In today’s world, that means a few things. Build a project to help others solve their problems. Write in public to attract people with those problems. Sell your project so you can continue pursuing your obsession. Improve your project as you learn what can only be learned through feedback. Evolve to a new project when you’ve reached the level that can only be reached through business.

Your life's work doesn't happen at some imaginary future moment. It happens at every passing moment. One foot in the unknown. Not so deep that you get anxious, and not so shallow that you get bored. But right where the meaningful flow of information is maximized. A gradual increase in challenge and complexity on the path of entrepreneurship. A mind framed with the constraints of a vision and anti-vision. Identifying a problem, accepting the challenge, experimenting with options, discovering a solution, and sharing it with the world to solidifying your growth as a gift. When you do this, I can't promise that you will achieve the success and fame you've always dreamed of, but I can assure you that you will not end up a mediocre clone.